[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The findings of a
groundbreaking new study
on lucid dreaming are in and
suggest that those trained
in the practice not only
see dramatic improvement
in their PTSD symptoms, but
may also experience change
on a biological level.
>> This is the first time
anybody's looked specifically
at a biomarker and related
to healing inside of a lucid
dream.
>> This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Research into lucid dreams
in which one wakes up
inside a dream has produced
some fascinating insight
into the neurological
features of this state.
Most of the
investigation thus far
has been focused on mapping
brain activity, which
has shown the unique
characteristics of the brain
function of lucid dreamers.
In a previous
episode, we reported
on the preliminary
findings of a study out
of the Institute
of Noetic Sciences,
or IONS, the first
of its kind to look
at the potential for healing
within a lucid dream,
both on a psychological
and physiological level.
Dr. Garret Yount is a
molecular neurobiologist
who led the study and updated
us on the final findings
of this extraordinary
investigation.
>> So in this study, we
partnered with an awesome lucid
dreaming teacher,
Charlie Morley.
And we had heard from him that
his workshops with veterans
with PTSD were really, really
helpful in terms of reducing
the symptoms of PTSD.
So we partnered with
him to basically bring
a scientific lens to that.
And so the idea was to recruit
folks with chronic PTSD.
We included both veterans
and non-veterans.
They attended a one-week
workshop from their home.
And Charlie taught them
how to achieve lucidity,
with the goal of transforming
their trauma during the dreams.
And then we, the
research team, just tried
to collect data along the
way without interfering
too much with the process.
>> The participants were
taught a variety of induction
techniques, and most had at
least one lucid dream within
the week.
The initial results of
the study were remarkable.
>> The big finding was that PTSD
symptoms decreased dramatically
during the workshop.
And amazingly, it stayed
that way all the way
when we looked a month later.
The testimonials from
the people in the study
were just so inspiring.
They talked about for 10 years
trying all kinds of therapy.
And then in one week-- boom,
their life has changed,
they're free of
their nightmares.
It's pretty incredible.
>> Researchers recently analyzed
the data from a particularly
unique component of the study.
>> One of the really cool
aspects of the study is we did
an exploratory assessment
of a biomarker.
So we looked at an
enzyme called amylase.
And we looked at levels of this.
You can measure
it in the saliva.
And we chose amylase
because it's been
shown to be a marker of stress.
With folks with PTSD,
it acts differently.
So this is indicative of chronic
sympathetic nervous system
activation.
So we were looking
at levels of amylase
to see if it might
show that there
was a general decrease in stress
after a healing lucid dream,
and that's exactly
what we found.
So this means that their
general stress levels went down.
So this was amazing.
This is the first evidence ever
of a physiological biomarker
changing in relation to
a healing lucid dream.
>> What can be the mechanism
behind this phenomenon?
So my best guess
about how it works
is that this is a way
to tap into the power
of the unconscious mind in
a way where you can really
direct and manifest healing.
This is oftentimes inhibited by
our thinking brain or thinking
mind.
And I think the sweet spot
of this lucid dreaming
is where you have a pact
between the conscious mind
and the subconscious mind to
really bring about healing
and just let it happen.
>> IONS is now planning
a larger follow-up study.
Should these results
be replicated,
the implications would be major.
>> So it's exciting to see
this physiological biomarker
changing in association
with reduced PTSD symptoms.
And it makes sense because
of the relationship
between the sympathetic
nervous system.
And it's very exciting
and has huge implications
for the treatment of PTSD and
other mental illnesses that
are difficult to treat.
But the fact that we found
out for the first time
evidence of this physiological
biomarker changing in relation
to the healing lucid dream has
implications for illnesses that
are more physically manifested.
If you can change the level
of enzyme in your body
through a healing
lucid dream, that
means you can change physical
illnesses, which I think
is tremendous.
And we have the opportunity to
learn a lot about the healing
power of the mind.
>> IONS is currently recruiting
participants for the follow-up
study.
Information is
available at noetic.org.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.